Tracey/dynamic attributes post (#2818)
elixirschool/elixirschool: posts/2022-07-12-components-with-dynamic-attributes.md

%{
  author: "Tracey Onim",
  author_link: "https://github.com/TraceyOnim",
  tags: ["LiveView", "Components", "LiveView Helpers"],
  date: ~D[2022-07-12],
  title: "Components with dynamic attributes",
  excerpt: """
  Learn how you can support dynamic attributes when using reusable components with assigns_to_attribute/2 function.
  """
}
---

> I’m quite sure most of you, have already interacted with components you have created more components to reuse in your application.However, sometimes you may feel stuck when creating reusable components more so when you want components to meet certain criteria. For example, you may want the feature in component A to be different from that of component B.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I’m quite sure most of you have already interacted with components. You  may have created components to reuse in your application. However, sometimes you may feel stuck when creating reusable components more so when you want components to meet certain criteria. For example, you may want the feature in component A to be different from that of component B.
```

> I’m quite sure most of you, have already interacted with components you have created more components to reuse in your application.However, sometimes you may feel stuck when creating reusable components more so when you want components to meet certain criteria. For example, you may want the feature in component A to be different from that of component B.

Reviewer: This statement is a little unclear:

> However, sometimes you may feel stuck when creating reusable components more so when you want components to meet certain criteria. For example, you may want the feature in component A to be different from that of component B.

Could you try re-phrasing it, even it that means you split up this explanation into multiple sentence or make it a bit longer? I'm not sure what you're trying to say here.

> What exactly I’m I trying to say? Lets say we are creating an application akin to kanban. I want us to create an application that can help users plan their weekly task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What exactly I’m I trying to say? Lets say we are creating an application akin to Kanban. I want us to create an application that can help users plan their weekly tasks.
```

![board plan](/images/board-plan.png)

> From the above image , I have split the board into 3 columns. That is the house, work and school columns. The user interacting with this board is supposed to add weekly task they are supposed to do in each sector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the above image , I have split the board into 3 columns--the "house", "work", and "school" columns. The user interacting with this board can add weekly tasks they are supposed to do to each column.
```

> You will also notice that each sector has a card of different color. I want us to use reusable component to implement in our application. The board will act as the parent LiveView while the card will be the component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will also notice that each column has a card of different color. I want us to use reusable components to implement these cards in our LiveView application. The board will act as the parent live view while the card will be the component.
```

> Now that we want the cards in each section to have different colors, how can we make it possible keeping in mind that we are using reusable components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We want the cards in each section to have different colors. So, how can leverage the same reusable component in each column, when the card should be a different color each time?
```

> Let’s begin:

Reviewer: Here I'd answer the question you pose on the line above with something like this:

"We can achieve this with the help of dynamic component attributes and the `assigns_to_attributes/2` function. Let's begin". 

This way, you are telling the reader exactly what they will learn how to do if they keep reading your post.

> ## 1.Create Board LiveView

Reviewer: It should be "live view" when referring to a single live view page/process. Use "LiveView" when referring to the framework.

    ]    

    school_cards = [
      %{task: "group discussion", id: "#{1}-school"},
      %{task: "submit assignment", id: "#{2}-school"},
      %{task: "work on school project", id: "#{3}-school"}
    ]

    {:ok,
     assign(socket, work_cards: work_cards, house_cards: house_cards, school_cards: school_cards)}

  end

  def render(assigns) do
    ~H"""
    <h1>Board</h1>
    <h2>Weekly Board Task </h2>
    <div class="row">
      <div class="column">
        <h3>Work</h3>
        <%= for card <- @work_cards do %> 
          <.card card={card} />
        <% end %>
       </div>
       <div class="column">
         <h3>House</h3>
         <%= for card <- @house_cards do %> 
           <.card card={card} />
         <% end %>
       </div>
       <div class="column">
         <h3>School</h3>
         <%= for card <- @school_cards do %> 
           <.card card={card} />
         <% end %>
        </div>
      </div>
    """
end

def card(assigns) do
    ~H"""
    <div>
      <div class="column">
        <%= @card.task %>
      </div>
    </div>
    """
  end
end

```

I have created a BoardLive page that renders each card component for house, work and school section.

> The card components have been defined using [function components](https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix_live_view/0.16.0/Phoenix.Component.html) mechanism, which is useful for reusing markup in our LiveView.

Reviewer: I would add just a bit more of an explanation here. Something like:

> Here, I'm iterating over the card structs in socket assigns. For each card struct, I'm rendering the details of that card with the help of the `card/1` function component. [Function components](https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix_live_view/0.16.0/Phoenix.Component.html) are functions that take in some assigns and return some HEEx markup. They are useful for reusing markup in our LiveView applications.

> **NB:** I’m not getting into the details of how the user should add their weekly task. In this example I have hard-coded the task assuming that the user had already added their task. We are actually displaying the task added to the cards .

Reviewer: Can you change `NB` to something more generic like `Note`? Kind of a nit pick but I think the abbreviate `NB` could be confusing to anyone who hasn't come across it before so I like to avoid abbreviations in general :)

Our weekly planning task board should look something similar to this when we open our browser:

![board plan output](/images/board-plan-output.png)

> ## 2.Problem

Reviewer: Can you add a little more info to this heading, maybe: `Problem: Reusing Components with Different Attributes`?

>   1. We want the cards in each section to have a different color from one another . For example, cards in work section can be blue, in house can be green and in school section can be yellow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  1. We want the cards in each column to have a different color from one another . For example, cards in the "work" column should be blue, cards in the "house" column should be green, and cards in the "school" column should be yellow.
```

>   2. Card component defined earlier should also be maintained.

Reviewer: I'd re-phrase this as: `We should be able to use the same `card/1` function component we defined earlier, while still ensuring that cards can be a different color in the different columns.`

> Imagine writing our markup in this manner:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We could solve the first problem like this:
```

```elixir
    <div class="row">
      <div class="column">
        <h3>Work</h3>
        <%= for card <- @work_cards do %> 
         <div>
          <div class="column bg-blue">
            <%= card.task %>
          </div>
         </div>
        <% end %>
       </div>
       <div class="column">
         <h3>House</h3>
         <%= for card <- @house_cards do %> 
           <div>
            <div class="column bg-green">
             <%= card.task %>
            </div>
          </div>
         <% end %>
       </div>
       <div class="column">
         <h3>School</h3>
         <%= for card <- @school_cards do %> 
          <div>
           <div class="column bg-yellow">
            <%= card.task %>
           </div>
         </div>
         <% end %>
        </div>
      </div>

```

> We have solved our first problem , its working but it looks so messed up. Personally, its redundant to write the same markup over and over again and this is the reason why we opted to use function components. However, when we use reusable components we are going back to our previous implementation.

Reviewer: "messed up" is a fairly subjective term. I'd use more objective language like: "we can do better" or "this code has some shortcomings".

> We have solved our first problem , its working but it looks so messed up. Personally, its redundant to write the same markup over and over again and this is the reason why we opted to use function components. However, when we use reusable components we are going back to our previous implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have solved our first problem , its working but it looks so messed up. It's redundant to write the same markup over and over again and this is the reason why we opted to use function components in the first place. However, our original implementation doesn't allow us to control the color of the cards in each column.
```

How can we exactly solve this problem?

> ## 3. Solution

Reviewer: Let's use a slightly more informative subtitle here. 
```suggestion
## 3. Solution: Dynamic Component Attributes with `aassigns_to_attributes/2`
```

> Luckily, in Phoenix LiveView v0.16.0 [assigns_to_attribute/2](https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix_live_view/0.16.0/Phoenix.LiveView.Helpers.html#assigns_to_attributes/2) function was introduced.This function takes in assigns as the first argument and a list of assign’s keys that are to be excluded as the optional second argument.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Luckily, Phoenix LiveView v0.16.0 introduced the [assigns_to_attribute/2](https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix_live_view/0.16.0/Phoenix.LiveView.Helpers.html#assigns_to_attributes/2) function. This function takes in assigns as the first argument and a list of assign’s keys that are to be excluded as the optional second argument.
```

> This function is Useful for transforming caller assigns into dynamic attributes while stripping reserved keys from the result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This function is useful for transforming caller assigns into dynamic attributes while stripping reserved keys from the result.
```

> This function is Useful for transforming caller assigns into dynamic attributes while stripping reserved keys from the result.

Reviewer: Can you explain what dynamic attributes are? Maybe clarify that this function takes component assigns and turns them into HTML attributes?

Author: I have made a change in that section . Does this explains it better?
```
Luckily, Phoenix LiveView v0.16.0 introduced the [assigns_to_attribute/2](https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix_live_view/0.16.0/Phoenix.LiveView.Helpers.html#assigns_to_attributes/2) function. 

_This function is useful for transforming caller assigns into dynamic attributes while stripping reserved keys from the result._

`assigns_to_attribute/2` takes in assigns as the first argument and a list of assign’s keys that are to be excluded as the optional second argument.Then it returns a filtered list of keywords for use as HTML attributes.
```

> Now that we are assured we can transform the assigns passed to card/1 into attributes, let’s go ahead and add class assign and pass bg-* i.e “bg-blue” as the value. “bg-*” represents background color with a css added property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we are assured we can transform the assigns passed to `card/1` into attributes, let’s go ahead and add an assigns of `class` to our call to `card/1`. We'll give that assigns a vlue of `"bg-*"`. “bg-*” represents background color with a CSS added property.
```

```elixir
<h3>Work</h3>
<%= for card <- @work_cards do %> 
   <.card card={card} class={"bg-blue"}/>
 <% end %>
.
.
.
 <h3>House</h3>
 <%= for card <- @house_cards do %> 
   <.card card={card} class={"bg-green"}/>
 <% end %>
.
.
.
<h3>School</h3>
<%= for card <- @school_cards do %> 
  <.card card={card} class={"bg-yellow"}/>
<% end %>

```

Inspect the assigns and see what it holds:

```elixir
def card(assigns) do
IO.inspect(assigns, label: "==================card component=====")    

~H"""
    <div>
      <div class="column">
        <%= @card.task %>
      </div>
    </div>
    """
  end

```

```elixir
 output:
==================card component=====: %{
  __changed__: nil,
  card: %{id: "1-work", task: "deploy to production"},
  class: "bg-blue"
}
```

> We can see the assigns contains the card and the class assigns. Lets go ahead and invoke the assigns_to_attribute/2 inside the card/1 to transform our class assign for use in `<div>` tag attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can see the assigns contains the card and the class assigns. Lets go ahead and invoke the assigns_to_attribute/2 inside the card/1 to transform our class assign for use in `<div>` tag attribute.
```

```elixir
def card(assigns) do
extra = assigns_to_attributes(assigns)
.
. 
end
```

If we invoke assigns_to_attributes/2 with the assigns, it returns a list of keywords as shown:

```elixir
[
  card: %{id: "3-school", task: "work on school project"},
  class: "column bg-yellow"
]
```

We don’t want to use the card assign as an attribute so we will have to exclude it from the list and only remain with the class assign.

```elixir
def card(assigns) do
extra = assigns_to_attributes(assigns, [:card])

> assigns = assign(assigns, :extra, extra)~H"""

Reviewer: ```suggestion
assigns = assign(assigns, :extra, extra)
~H"""
```

    <div>

>       <div {@ extra} >

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      <div {@extra} >
```

        <%= @card.task %>
      </div>
    </div>
    """
end
```

> Next, I have updated our assigns with the attributes(extra) using the [assign/2](https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix_live_view/0.16.0/Phoenix.LiveView.html#assign/2) function .We shall use the @extra to output as HTML attributes on the <div> tag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here I have updated our assigns with the HTML attributes contained in `extra` using the [assign/2](https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix_live_view/0.16.0/Phoenix.LiveView.html#assign/2) function. So we can use the `@extra` assignment to output HTML attributes on the `<div>` tag.
```

> **NB:** The component markup has no column class passed to it.I had to remove it there and pass it to class assign when calling the card/1 function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** The `class` assignment should also contain the "column" class, along with the `"bg-*"` class, as shown below.
```

```elixir
<.card card={card} class={"column bg-green"}/>
```

> This is how our rendered markup looks like when you inspect on the browser:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is how our rendered markup looks like when you inspect it in the browser:
```

```
<div>
  <div class="column bg-green">
    wash my dog
  </div>
</div>
```

> ![board plan output2](/images/board-plan-output2.png)

Reviewer: Wrap up with a short "Conclusion" section that sums up what the reader learned in a few sentences.

%{
  author: "Tracey Onim",
  author_link: "https://github.com/TraceyOnim",
  tags: ["LiveView", "Components", "LiveView Helpers"],
  date: ~D[2022-07-12],
  title: "Components with dynamic attributes",
  excerpt: """
  Learn how you can support dynamic attributes when using reusable components with assigns_to_attribute/2 function.
  """
}
---

> I’m quite sure most of you have already interacted with components. You  may have created components to reuse in your application. However, sometimes you may feel stuck when creating reusable components more so when you want to pass in common attributes with different values in your component's markup. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I’m quite sure most of you have already interacted with live view components. You  may have created components to reuse in your live view application. However, sometimes you may feel stuck when creating reusable components more so when you want to pass in common attributes with different values in your component's markup. 
```

For example, lets say that I have a component markup that generates something like this:

> ```elixir

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```html
```

<div>
  <div class="column bg-green">
    learn dynamic attributes
  </div>
</div>

```

> In the component there is a `class` attribute assigned with `column` and `bg-green` values. But the component is supposed to be reusable and when I used it somewhere else, I may want a `yellow` background.That means I should pass in `bg-yellow` class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the component there is a `class` HTML attribute assigned with `column` and `bg-green` values. But the component is supposed to be reusable and when I use it somewhere else, I may want a `"yellow"` background. That means I should set a `bg-yellow` class.
```

>  ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 ```html
```

  <div class="column bg-yellow">

 ```  

> What exactly I’m I trying to say? Lets create an application akin to Kanban. I want us to create an application that can help users plan their weekly tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I'll show you exactly how to build the re-usable component we need in an example application akin to Kanban that can help users plan their weekly tasks.
```

![board plan](/images/board-plan.png)

From the above image , I have split the board into 3 columns--the "house", "work", and "school" columns. The user interacting with this board can add weekly tasks they are supposed to do to each column.

You will also notice that each column has a card of different color. I want us to use reusable components to implement these cards in our LiveView application. The board will act as the parent live view while the card will be the component.

We want the cards in each section to have different colors. So, how can we leverage the same reusable component in each column, when the card should be a different color each time?

> We can achieve this with the help of dynamic component attributes and the assigns_to_attributes/2 function. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can achieve this with the help of dynamic component attributes and the `assigns_to_attributes/2` function. 
```

```

I have created a BoardLive page that renders each card component for house, work and school section.

Here, I'm iterating over the card structs in socket assigns. For each card struct, I'm rendering the details of that card with the help of the `card/1` [function components](https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix_live_view/0.16.0/Phoenix.Component.html). Function components are functions that take in some assigns and return some HEEx markup. They are useful for reusing markup in our LiveView applications.

**Note:** I’m not getting into the details of how the user should add their weekly task. In this example I have hard-coded the task assuming that the user had already added their task. We are actually displaying the task added to the cards .

Our weekly planning task board should look something similar to this when we open our browser:

![board plan output](/images/board-plan-output.png)

## 2.Problem: Reusing components with different attributes

  1. We want the cards in each column to have a different color from one another . For example, cards in the "work" column should be blue, cards in the "house" column should be green, and cards in the "school" column should be yellow.

>   2. We should be able to use the same card/1 function component we defined earlier, while still ensuring that cards can be a different color in the different columns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  2. We should be able to use the same `card/1` function component we defined earlier, while still ensuring that cards can be a different color in the different columns.
```

We could solve the first problem like this:

```elixir
    <div class="row">
      <div class="column">
        <h3>Work</h3>
        <%= for card <- @work_cards do %> 
         <div>
          <div class="column bg-blue">
            <%= card.task %>
          </div>
         </div>
        <% end %>
       </div>
       <div class="column">
         <h3>House</h3>
         <%= for card <- @house_cards do %> 
           <div>
            <div class="column bg-green">
             <%= card.task %>
            </div>
          </div>
         <% end %>
       </div>
       <div class="column">
         <h3>School</h3>
         <%= for card <- @school_cards do %> 
          <div>
           <div class="column bg-yellow">
            <%= card.task %>
           </div>
         </div>
         <% end %>
        </div>
      </div>

```

> We have solved our first problem , its working but this code has some shortcomings. Personally, its redundant to write the same markup over and over again and this is the reason why we opted to use function components in the first place. However, our original implementation doesn't allow us to control the color of the cards in each column.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have solved our first problem , its working but this code has some shortcomings. Personally, its redundant to write the same `<div>` markup over and over again and this is the reason why we opted to use function components in the first place. However, our original implementation doesn't allow us to control the color of the cards in each column.
```

> How can we exactly solve this problem?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How can we solve this problem?
```

## 3. Solution: Dynamic Component Attributes with `assigns_to_attributes/2`

> Luckily, Phoenix LiveView v0.16.0 introduced the [assigns_to_attribute/2](https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix_live_view/0.16.0/Phoenix.LiveView.Helpers.html#assigns_to_attributes/2) function. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Luckily, Phoenix LiveView v0.16.0 introduced the [`assigns_to_attribute/2`](https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix_live_view/0.16.0/Phoenix.LiveView.Helpers.html#assigns_to_attributes/2) function. 
```

_This function is useful for transforming caller assigns into dynamic attributes while stripping reserved keys from the result._

> `assigns_to_attribute/2` takes in assigns as the first argument and a list of assign’s keys that are to be excluded as the optional second argument.Then it returns a filtered list of keywords for use as HTML attributes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`assigns_to_attribute/2` takes in assigns as the first argument and a list of assign’s keys that are to be excluded as the optional second argument. Then it returns a filtered list of keywords for use as HTML attributes.
```

> Now that we are assured we can transform the assigns passed to `card/1` into attributes, let’s go ahead and add an assigns of `class` to our call to `card/1`. We'll give that assigns a value of `"bg-*"`. “bg-*” represents background color with a CSS added property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we are assured we can transform the assigns passed to `card/1` into HTML attributes, let’s go ahead and add an assigns of `"class"` to our call to `card/1`. We'll give that assigns a value of `"bg-*"`. “bg-*” represents background color with a CSS added property.
```

```elixir
<h3>Work</h3>
<%= for card <- @work_cards do %> 
   <.card card={card} class={"bg-blue"}/>
 <% end %>

> .

Reviewer: Remove the lines that just contain `.`. If you need an ellipsis, use an HTML comment like this:

```HTML
<!--- ... -->
```

.
.
 <h3>House</h3>
 <%= for card <- @house_cards do %> 
   <.card card={card} class={"bg-green"}/>
 <% end %>
.
.
.
<h3>School</h3>
<%= for card <- @school_cards do %> 
  <.card card={card} class={"bg-yellow"}/>
<% end %>

```

Inspect the assigns and see what it holds:

```elixir
def card(assigns) do
IO.inspect(assigns, label: "==================card component=====")    

~H"""
    <div>
      <div class="column">
        <%= @card.task %>
      </div>
    </div>
    """
  end

```

```elixir
 output:
==================card component=====: %{
  __changed__: nil,
  card: %{id: "1-work", task: "deploy to production"},
  class: "bg-blue"
}
```

> We can see the assigns contains the card and the class assigns. Lets go ahead and invoke the assigns_to_attribute/2 inside the card/1 to transform our class assign for use in `<div>` tag attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can see the assigns contains the card and the class assigns. Let's go ahead and invoke the `assigns_to_attribute/2` inside the `card/1` to transform our class assignment for use in a `<div>` tag attribute.
```

```elixir
def card(assigns) do
extra = assigns_to_attributes(assigns)

> .

Reviewer: Same thing here, use this instead:

```elixir
# ...
```

. 
end
```

> If we invoke assigns_to_attributes/2 with the assigns, it returns a list of keywords as shown:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we invoke `assigns_to_attributes/2` with the assigns, it returns a list of keywords as shown:
```

```elixir
[
  card: %{id: "3-school", task: "work on school project"},
  class: "column bg-yellow"
]
```

> We don’t want to use the card assign as an attribute so we will have to exclude it from the list and only remain with the class assign.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We don’t want to use the card assign as an HTML attribute so we will have to exclude it from the list and only remain with the class assign.
```
